# Performing vendoring for the Kata Containers project

* [Vendoring tool](#vendoring-tool)
    * [How to install and update dep](#how-to-install-and-update-dep)
    * [Overview of the main commands](#overview-of-the-main-commands)
* [Vendoring use cases](#vendoring-use-cases)
    * [Initialize vendoring of the package](#initialize-vendoring-of-the-package)
    * [Vendor a newly imported package](#vendor-a-newly-imported-package)
    * [Update a vendored package](#update-a-vendored-package)
    * [Remove a vendored package](#remove-a-vendored-package)
    * [Test a pending pull request](#test-a-pending-pull-request)
* [Miscellaneaous](#miscellaneaous)

## Vendoring tool

[`dep`](https://github.com/golang/dep) is the vendoring tool chosen for this
project because it is simple and powerful for some corner cases. Furthermore,
this tool is expected to be the official vendoring tool for Golang.

Ensure you use the latest version of the `dep` tool. See 
[How to install and update dep](#how-to-install-and-update-dep) for details.

### How to install and update dep

Install or update this tool using the following command:
```bash
$ go get -u github.com/golang/dep/cmd/dep
```

Make sure your `PATH` contains `$GOPATH/bin`:
```bash
$ export PATH=$GOPATH/bin:$PATH
```

### Overview of the main commands

- `dep init`: Initialize a new project with manifest and lock files.
- `dep ensure`: Ensure a dependency is safely vendored in the project.

## Vendoring use cases

Here will be listed the different vendoring use cases a developer could
encounter when developing for Kata Containers.

### Initialize vendoring of the package

If no prior vendoring has been performed on the package, you need to
initialize it with the following command:
```bash
$ dep init
```

This should create a new directory named `vendor` at the root of your
package, and two new files to manage the vendoring (i.e. `Gopkg.toml`
and `Gopkg.lock`).

`Gopkg.lock` is automatically re-generated by `dep` every time a new
`dep ensure` command is issued. This file should not be modified by the
developer.
`Gopkg.toml` is automatically generated by `dep init` and can be modified
in order to add a constraint on a package to follow a specific revision.

The following is what `Gopkg.toml` should look like:
```toml
# Gopkg.toml example
#
# Refer to https://github.com/golang/dep/blob/master/docs/Gopkg.toml.md
# for detailed Gopkg.toml documentation.
#
# required = ["github.com/user/thing/cmd/thing"]
# ignored = ["github.com/user/project/pkgX", "bitbucket.org/user/project/pkgA/pkgY"]
#
# [[constraint]]
#   name = "github.com/user/project"
#   version = "1.0.0"
#
# [[constraint]]
#   name = "github.com/user/project2"
#   branch = "dev"
#   source = "github.com/myfork/project2"
#
# [[override]]
#  name = "github.com/x/y"
#  version = "2.4.0"
#
# [prune]
#   non-go = false
#   go-tests = true
#   unused-packages = true
```

This file contains all the information you need to modify it properly.

At this point you can vendor any package needed from your code.

### Pruning non-go files

`dep` provides the feature to remove all non-go files from your vendor tree
during its prune phase. By default this is not enabled, but generally for
Kata Containers repositories, we do enable this feature. If possible, modify your
`[prune]` section to enable this feature:

```toml
 [prune]
   non-go = true
   go-tests = true
   unused-packages = true
```

### Vendor a newly imported package

The following case describes a situation when you add new code that relies
on a package that has never been imported (e.g. `github.com/foo/bar`):
```bash
$ dep ensure
```

At this point, only the required files will be copied into `vendor`.

Additionally, you might want to ensure the vendored package refers to a
specific version. This is called a constraint with `dep`. By modifying
`Gopkg.toml`, you can decide to force the package `github.com/foo/bar` to
point to the revision `f5742cb6`. The following is what the file should look
like:
```toml
[[constraint]]
  name = "github.com/foo/bar"
  revision = "f5742cb6"
```

Or, if you want to point to a specific version `1.2.4`:
```toml
[[constraint]]
  name = "github.com/foo/bar"
  version = "1.2.4"
```

Or, if you want to point to a specific branch `work-dev`:
```toml
[[constraint]]
  name = "github.com/foo/bar"
  branch = "work-dev"
```

Lastly, a powerful constraint is to specify if the source of the repository
comes from a forked repository:
```toml
[[constraint]]
  name = "github.com/foo/bar"
  branch = "fork-work-dev"
  source = "github.com/myfork/bar"
```

__Note:__ Constraining a package is important because this is the only way to
be certain of the imported package version. This prevents any build failure
that could result from a package change on the upstream.

### Update a vendored package

The following case describes a situation where you add some code that relies
on another version of a package already vendored. This is a simple case since
the package is already part of the vendoring. You modify `Gopkg.toml` by
updating the vendoring version:

```diff
--- Gopkg.toml.orig     2018-01-23 09:04:54.160760426 -0800
+++ Gopkg.toml.new      2018-01-23 09:05:09.164094911 -0800
@@ -1,3 +1,3 @@
 [[constraint]]
   name = "github.com/foo/bar"
-  revision = "f5742cb6"
+  revision = "a4be45c7"
```

Let `dep` update the vendoring by relying on this new revision:
```bash
$ dep ensure
```

### Remove a vendored package

The following case describes a situation where you modify the existing
code, no longer relying on a vendored package. Running the usual commands
removes the vendored package from `vendor` directory and from
`Gopkg.lock`:
```bash
$ dep ensure
```

If a constraint is set in `Gopkg.toml`, it is your responsibility to remove
the constraint manually from the file.

### Test a pending pull request

The following case describes a situation where you need to perform testing
on your code due to a pending pull request from a vendored package.
The easiest and safest way to do that is to rely on a feature proposed
by `dep` called `override`. This feature allows you to leave the constraints
unmodified, but relies on a different version of the vendored package for
testing purposes.

#### From the main repository

The pending pull request can be submitted to the main repository through a
development branch `work-dev`. In this case, you will need to modify
`Gopkg.toml` as follows:

```diff
--- Gopkg.toml.orig     2018-01-23 09:04:54.160760426 -0800
+++ Gopkg.toml.new      2018-01-23 09:06:49.735633780 -0800
@@ -1,3 +1,7 @@
 [[constraint]]
   name = "github.com/foo/bar"
   revision = "f5742cb6"
+
+[[override]]
+  name = "github.com/foo/bar"
+  branch = "work-dev"
```

#### From a forked repository

The pending pull request can be submitted to a forked repository through a
development branch called `work-dev`. In this case you will need to modify
`Gopkg.toml` as follows:

```diff
--- Gopkg.toml.orig     2018-01-23 09:04:54.160760426 -0800
+++ Gopkg.toml.new      2018-01-23 09:09:58.475261707 -0800
@@ -1,3 +1,8 @@
 [[constraint]]
   name = "github.com/foo/bar"
   revision = "f5742cb6"
+
+[[override]]
+  name = "github.com/foo/bar"
+  branch = "work-dev"
+  source = "github.com/myfork/bar"
```

The previous case is more common because typically you do not have permissions
to push directly to the main repository.

## Miscellaneaous

For additional information about vendoring, see
"[Re-vendor PRs](https://github.com/kata-containers/community/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#re-vendor-prs)".
